T H E CHARACTER OF
    P HYS ICAL L AW
THE MESSENGER LECTURES have taken place annually at Cornell
since 1924, when Hiram J. Messenger, a graduate and Professor of
Mathematics, gave a sum of money to encourage eminent per­
sonalities from anywhere in the world to visit Cornell and talk to
the academic community. In establishing the fund for the lectures,
Messenger specified that it is "to provide a course or courses of
lectures on the evolution of civilization for the special purpose
of    raising the moral standard of   our   political,   business,   and
social life."
     In November Professor Richard P. Feynman, the distinguished
physicist and educator, gave the 1964 lectures.
         T H E CHARACTER OF
             P HYS ICAL L AW
RICHARD FEYNMAN WITH NEW FOREWORD BY FRANK WILCZEK




                    The MIT Press
                Cambridge, Massachusetts
                   London, England
© 1965 Richard Feynman

All rights reserved. No part of this book may be reproduced
in any form by any electronic or mechanical means (including
photocopying, recording, or information storage and retrieval)
without permission in writing from the publisher.

Printed and bound in the United States of America.

Library of Congress Cataloging-in-Publication Data
Names: Feynman, Richard P. (Richard Phillips), 1918-1988,
  author. | Wilczek, Frank, writer of foreword.
Title: The character of physical law / Richard Feynman ;
  new foreword by Frank Wilczek.
Description: Cambridge, MA ; London, England : The MIT
  Press, [2017]
Identifiers: LCCN 2016036636| ISBN 9780262533416 (pbk. ;
  alk. paper) | ISBN 0262533413 (pbk. ; alk. paper)
Subjects: LCSH: Physics.
Classification: LCC QC28 .F4 2017 | DDC 530--dc23 LC record
available at https://lccn.loc.gov/2016036636


10   9   8   7   6   5   4   3   2   1
                        Contents
  Foreword by Frank Wilczek     1
  Foreword by BBC Producer Alan Sleath        9
  Introduction by the Provost of Cornell University     11
1 The Law of Gravitation, an example of Physical Law         13
2 The Relation of Mathematics to Physics          35
3 The Great Conservation Principles      59
4 Symmetry in Physical Law      84
5 The Distinction of Past and Future     108
6 Probability and Uncertainty—
  the Quantum Mechanical view of Nature           127
7 Seeking New Laws      149
                           Foreword
                         fra n k wilcz ek
The Character of Physical Law is a very special book. Written in
1965, it has aged very well. Feynman’s choice of scientific sub-
jects seems inspired in retrospect. And his insights went deep.
    But The Character of Physical Law is much more than an expo-
sition of facts and ideas.
    It is also a character study. The character is a most remarkable
one: Feynman himself. His playful, curious spirit animates the
text, while his essential honesty and humanity pervade it.
    It is also a work of literature, full of memorable phrases. Here’s
one that’s inspired for decades, ever since I first encountered it as
                                                                           F
a student:
What we need is imagination, but imagination in a terrible straitjacket.
In video form, The Character of Physical Law is often screened on
college campuses. Those events can serve as focal points, where
aspiring young scientists meet kindred spirits. Seeing and hearing
                                                                           F
Feynman in action is a wonderful experience, which you can also
experience using the Internet. But the book is a distilled resource,
which you can return to and assimilate. You can even add your
own notes, and I urge you to do so.

                                 I
A lot has happened in physics since 1965. While The Character of
Physical Law holds up amazingly well, it can use some updates.
I’ll offer a few. Before beginning, let me emphasize that the need
for these particular updates enhances rather than detracts from the
book. Feynman tried to identify issues at the forefront of phys-
ics that seemed unresolved, important and approachable. As you’ll
see, he succeeded in doing just that.
                             Foreword
   On page 116, Feynman writes: “Therefore I think it necessary
to add to the physical laws the hypothesis that in the past the uni-
verse was more ordered, in the technical sense, than it is today—I
think this is the additional statement that is needed to make sense,
and to make an understanding of the irreversibility.”
   In recent years physical cosmology has matured into a rich and
sophisticated science, with many impressive, quantitative results.
The broad outlines of Big Bang cosmology are no longer in doubt.
And so, armed with considerable insight, we can assess Feyn-
man’s “hypothesis” that in the past the universe was more ordered.
   According to modern physical cosmology, our universe evolved
from a very special, remarkably simple beginning. During the
initial stages of the Big Bang, the matter in the universe was in
thermal equilibrium at an extremely high temperature, almost per-
fectly uniform in composition and density. Since then, the universe
has expanded and cooled. The structures we see today, ranging
from clusters of galaxies to individual galaxies to stars and planets,
emerged through gravitational instability from extremely small de-
viations from perfect uniformity (about one part in ten thousand).
More specifically, regions containing slightly more than the aver-
age density of matter attracted surrounding matter more effective-
ly than less dense regions, thus getting denser, in a self-reinforcing
cycle, until they condensed into the structures we see today.
   Now, a nearly uniform, hot distribution of matter is, on the face
of it, the opposite of “ordered.” Superficially, then, it might ap-
pear that Feynman’s explanation of irreversibility is a non-starter.
Deeper consideration, however, validates his guess.
   The point is that while matter was in a maximally disordered
state, approximating thermal equilibrium, close to the Big Bang,
gravity was in a highly unusual state, very far from its equilibrium.
Because gravity would like to clump things together, a state of
near uniformity is very far from gravitational equilibrium.
   As just noted, gravitational instability makes small deviations
from uniformity grow. Thus the gravitational form of order im-
plicit in Big Bang cosmology is not just a theoretical quibble, but
the deep origin of structure in our universe.
   Once we admit that refinement, we can elevate what Feynman
called a “hypothesis” about the origin of irreversibility into ac-

                                  2
                            Foreword
complished fact. There was a lot of (gravitational) order in the
early universe, and its gradual, partial degradation—that is, the
formation of galaxies, stars, and planets—is almost certainly the
deep origin of irreversibility, as Feynman proposed.
   While Feynman’s intuitive arguments are not scrupulously rig-
orous, I find them convincing. And of course, all this still leaves
open the question of why the universe began in a state with matter
ordered, but gravity “disordered” (that is, far from equilibrium).
But Feynman’s discussion of the origin of irreversibility frames
the central question brilliantly, and takes a big step toward an an-
swer.
   On page 152, Feynman writes: “… we do not today understand
the forces between neutrons and protons to the extent that if you
wanted me to, and gave me enough time and computers, I could
calculate the energy levels of carbons, or something like that.”
   Now we do. We have a very precise and accurately tested theory
of the strong force called quantum chromodynamics, or QCD for
short.
   QCD makes much more general the quantum electrodynamics
(QED), which won Feynman his Nobel Prize (see below). I like to
call QCD “QED on steroids.” QED tells the story of a single pho-
ton, responding to electric charge, but QCD is the saga of an octet
of gluons, which can respond to or transform three different kinds
of charge, which are called (rather incongruously) color charges.
   According to QCD, protons and neutrons—and the many other
strongly interacting particles discovered at high-energy accelera-
tors, which Feynman called “the dredge … digging up all this
mud”—are made from quarks and gluons. Quarks and gluons are
ideally simple particles that obey beautiful equations, while pro-
tons and neutrons (and the other strongly interacting particles) are
complicated composites. People with powerful computers have
used the equations of QCD to calculate the masses of the most
important strongly interacting particles (including protons and
neutrons.) Now, they are making a good start on nuclear physics.
   Feynman, with his parton model, made an important contribu-
tion to the discovery of QCD. And during the last fifteen years of
his career he spent much of his time developing that theory. But
more on that later.

                                 3
                            Foreword
   On page 155, Feynman writes: “It seems that if we take quan-
tum mechanics, plus relativity, plus the proposition that everything
has to be local, plus a number of tacit assumptions, we get in-
consistency, because we get infinity for various things when we
calculate them, and if we get infinity how can we ever say that this
agrees with nature?”
   Here Feynman, for once, went astray. Indeed the theory we just
discussed, QCD, incorporates relativity, quantum mechanics, and
locality in a fully consistent way—and also describes how nature
works.
   We now understand that the infinities which plague many quan-
tum field theories, including QED, arise because the couplings be-
tween particles become very strong at short distances, ultimately
leading to singularities. But in other theories, including QCD,
the interaction between particles becomes weaker, not stronger,
at short distances: a property called asymptotic freedom. Asymp-
totically free theories do not contain the nasty infinities that so
disturbed Feynman.
   Now I’ll add a couple of brief comments that are not updates as
such, but seem appropriate here.
   On page 160, Feynman writes: “For example, the quantum
theory of gravitation is going very slowly, if at all, because all
the experiments you can do never involve quantum mechanics and
gravitation at the same time.”
   One might quibble with the way this statement is formulated—
after all, astrophysics is full of situations where both gravitation
and quantum mechanics are relevant, and here on Earth all quan-
tum experiments take place within the Earth’s gravitational field.
What Feynman meant to say, of course, is that experiments to
probe characteristically quantum effects of gravitational interac-
tions—roughly speaking, the influence of individual gravitons—
are impractical. That is still the case. As Feynman anticipated, this
problem has made progress in the quantum theory of gravitation
difficult and uncertain.
   On page 105, Feynman shows off a little gem of insight,
more advanced than anything else in the book, which rewards
closer inspection. It concerns the connection between symmetry


                                 4
                           Foreword
and conservation laws, which marks the high point of Lecture 4
(“Symmetry and Conservation Laws”).
   The connection between symmetry and conservation laws is
called Noether’s theorem, after Emmy Noether, who derived it
mathematically. Noether’s derivation is crisp and correct, but its
nub is an abstract algebraic manipulation. Feynman sketches, in
words and a simple picture (Figure 25) a simpler, intuitive deriva-
tion. His argument is far from general, nor is it completely rigor-
ous, but it sheds new light on a mysterious centerpiece of physics,
and deserves to be developed further.

                                   II
Richard Feynman (May 11, 1918–February 15, 1988) won the
Nobel Prize in 1965, together with Julian Schwinger and Sin-Itiro
Tomonaga, for his epochal work on quantum electrodynamics.
   Classical electrodynamics was the great achievement of nine-
teenth-century physics, culminating in James Clerk Maxwell’s
theoretical formulation of the field equations (Maxwell’s equa-
tions) in 1864 and the experimental verification by Heinrich Hertz
of their most startling consequence, electromagnetic radiation (ra-
dio waves), in 1887.
   Classical electrodynamics scored many triumphs, but by the
turn of the century some serious problems loomed. Most impor-
tant for future developments was the so-called ultraviolet catas-
trophe in black-body radiation. Classical electrodynamics predicts
that hot bodies emit more short-wavelength radiation than they do
in reality. For an ideal radiator (which is also an ideal absorber—
hence the term “black body”) the theory predicts radiation with
infinite energy.
   To address this difficulty, Max Planck and Albert Einstein pro-
posed a stark departure from classical ideas. They proposed that
light comes in particle-like units, later christened photons. Fol-
lowing important contributions from several physicists, notably
including Niels Bohr, Werner Heisenberg, and Erwin Schrodinger,
Paul Dirac worked out a great synthesis of classical electrodynam-
ics with the quantum ideas in the late 1920s. It is this theory we
now call quantum electrodynamics, or QED.


                                5
                            Foreword
   QED rapidly cleared up so many problems in atomic physics
that by 1929 Dirac would claim that “the underlying physical laws
necessary for the mathematical theory of a large part of physics
and the whole of chemistry are thus completely known.”
   Dirac’s claim has stood the test of time, but it had to survive a
crisis. For though QED brilliantly succeeded in practice, its theo-
retical underpinnings looked shaky. Approximate solutions to its
equations—technically speaking, in the lowest order of perturba-
tion theory—gave results that agreed very nicely with the experi-
ment. But when one tried to get more accurate solutions, disaster
loomed: the answers were mathematically infinite, or at best ill-de-
fined. This is what Feynman was referring to in the passage quoted
above, where he wrote, “… we get infinity for various things, and
if we get infinity how can we say that this agrees with nature?”
   That problem smoldered at the frontier of theoretical physics
for a decade. It inspired Feynman, early in his career, to explore
unorthodox approaches that might avoid the infinities. One inge-
nious proposal, worked out in collaboration with his thesis advisor
John Wheeler, was to bring in advanced potentials, which allow
the future to act back on the present. (Then one must explain why
such retro-causation is not more obvious! Feynman and Wheel-
er did that, very cleverly. There are echoes of their work in this
book’s chapter on irreversibility.)
   Another, which succeeded brilliantly, was to formulate QED
directly in terms of interactions between particles, forgoing the
heavy machinery of continuum field theory. That approach led
Feynman to his cartoon-like “Feynman diagram” depiction of fun-
damental processes, and to rules for calculating with them. Using
this technique, Feynman found that he calculated predictions for
physical processes easily, in a few lines, where conventional tech-
niques required many pages of laborious calculation. Yet, though
his starting point seemed totally different, Feynman found in a host
of examples that he always reproduced the conventional results,
just more efficiently. Soon he convinced himself that his technique
was an advantageous reorganization of Dirac’s QED, rather than a
new theory. This came as a disappointment to him.
   Importantly, though, the diagram technique allowed one to tame
QED’s problematic infinities. Roughly speaking, Feynman’s idea

                                 6
                            Foreword
(known as renormalization theory) is that if one organizes the cal-
culations properly, to express relationships only among physically
observable quantities, then the infinities do not appear. The most
convenient formulation of the theory contains many idealized ob-
jects, which cannot be measured. We have to give up the idea that
the theory gives sensible (i.e., finite) predictions for the behavior
of such objects. But if we can keep our eyes on the prize, and
look only at physical questions, then (according to renormaliza-
tion theory) we will see only finite quantities. Feynman’s diagram
technique, because of its relative simplicity, made it possible to
show how this actually worked in QED. Feynman himself worked
it out in simple cases, and Freeman Dyson proved it in general.
    Feynman and Dyson thus made it possible to calculate more
accurate answers in QED. Meanwhile, postwar developments in
precision spectroscopy and microwave technology made possible
more accurate experimental measurements of basic QED pro-
cesses. In one of the crowning triumphs of physics, theory and
experiment agreed. And this triumph has endured: decades later,
QED continues to stand as the most precise and accurate theory in
physical science.
    Feynman made several other major contributions to what we
might call hardcore fundamental physics. The V-A theory of weak
interactions, which he developed together with his colleague Mur-
ray Gell-Mann, was an important stepping-stone toward the mod-
ern “standard model.” Feynman especially treasured it, because
(to his mind) it was the one time in his career that he proposed a
fundamentally new physical behavior that was subsequently ob-
served.
    Most physicists, however, would probably rank his invention of
the parton model more highly. In the late 1960s, when he proposed
it, quarks were a rough and somewhat problematic construct used
to organize the zoo of strongly interacting particles, where gluons
were no more than a funny name for a mystery. Feynman, benefit-
ing from his unmatched experience with QED, analyzed the kind
of experiments—so-called deep inelastic scattering—that could
reveal the existence and properties of simple constituent particles
inside protons and neutrons (which he called, noncommittally,
partons). Some partons, it turned out, could be identified with

                                 7
                            Foreword
quarks. And close analysis of their behavior, building on parton
model ideas, led directly to modern QCD.
   Feynman’s “imagination in a straitjacket” led him to original
ways of formulating known physics. These include the path inte-
gral formulation of quantum mechanics, the influence functional
for interacting quantum systems, and the ordered operator calcu-
lus. Path integrals, after being regarded for several years as a mere
curiosity, have come to life as a centerpiece of modern theoretical
physics. They are, specifically, the way we teach computers how
to do QCD. I expect that operator calculus and influence function-
als—brilliantly original, yet in hindsight utterly simple, natural
ideas—might likewise blossom.
   In his boyhood Feynman was locally renowned for radio repair.
He never lost his love for direct involvement with physical reality,
and for technology. In these realms, he was a visionary. His after-
dinner talk of 1959, “There’s Plenty of Room at the Bottom,” was
a harbinger of nanotechnology, and still makes interesting read-
ing today. (Freely available on the Internet, it makes an excellent
follow-up to The Character of Physical Law.) In 1982 he sketched
the possibility of “quantum computers,” which could exploit quan-
tum behavior to do computations much more efficiently than exist-
ing computers. Both nanotechnology and quantum computing are
vibrant fields today.
   Feynman became a public celebrity with his performance on
the commission investigating the Challenger disaster, where he
used a glass of ice water to highlight the cause—seals that failed at
low temperatures (i.e., in cold weather).
   Feynman wrote many books. Most are intended for researchers,
but several were meant to be more broadly accessible. The latter
range from entertaining collections of personal anecdotes to QED:
The Strange Theory of Light and Matter, which is a brave attempt
to present QED from scratch. But I think that the book you have in
your hands, The Character of Physical Law, written at the height
of his power, is Feynman’s popular masterpiece—and that it is the
single best introduction to modern physics, altogether.




                                 8
                       Foreword
The seven chapters which make up this book were lectures
presented as the Messenger Lectures at Cornell University
in the United States. They were delivered to an audience of
students who wished to know in general terms more about
'The Character of Physical Law'. The lectures were not
given from a prepared manuscript, but were delivered
extempore from a few notes.
   The Messenger Lectures have taken place annually at
Cornell since 1 924, when Hiram J. Messenger, a graduate
and professor of Mathematics, gave a sum of money to en­
courage eminent personalities from anywhere in the world
to visit Cornell and talk to the students. In establishing the
fund for the lectures Messenger specified that it is 'to provide
a course or courses of lectures on the evolution of civilization
for the special purpose of raising the moral standard of our
political, business and social life'.
   In November Professor Richard P. Feynman, the distin­
guished physicist and educator, was invited to give the 1 964
lectures. He was formerly a professor at Cornell and is now
Professor of Theoretical Physics at California Institute of
Technology. He has recently been made a Foreign Member
of the Royal Society, and is noted not only for his contribu­
tion to present day understanding of the laws of physics,
but also for his ability to bring his subject alive to the
non-physicist.
    The chapters in this book are reports of talks which were
presented to a packed audience from a large stage which
 allowed Professor Feynman uninhibited expression of speech
 and movement. He has international prominence as a
 lecturer, and is known for his exciting platform manner.

                               9
                           Foreword
This book is intended to serve as a guide or memory aid
for television viewers who may see the lectures and wish to
have a permanent reminder to refer to. Although it is not
in any way to be regarded as a textbook, the student of
physics in search of a clearer understanding of the laws
will be enlightened by many of the arguments.
   Richard Feynman is already known to BBC- 1 as one of
the physicists in Philip Daly's production 'Men at the Heart
of Matter' and for his splendid contribution to 'Strangeness
minus three', one of the most fascinating programmes on
recent scientific discovery in 1 964.
   The B B C Science and Features Department became in­
terested when it was known that Professor Feynman was to
give the Messenger Lectures. The series is being presented
in B B C-2, as part of the Further Education Scheme,
and continues in the style of the lectures already given by
such distinguished men as Bondi on Relativity, Kendrew on
Molecula r Biology, Morrison on Quantum Mechanics and
Porter on Thermodynamics.
   What you are about to read is a transcription of the lec­
tures. They have been checked for scientific accuracy by
Professor Feynman. My assistant Fiona Holmes and I have
assembled the spoken words so that they are now set down
in print. We hope that this book will be acceptable to you.
To have worked with Richard Feynman has been a re­
warding experience, and we trust that viewers and readers
will gain much from this project.
                   Alan Sleath , Producer BBC Outside Broadcasts
                   Science and Features Department, June 1965

The BBC is grateful to the Cornell University News Bureau for
permission to reproduce Plate 2, and to the California Institute
of Technology for permission to reproduce other photographs
and drawings used in Lecture 1.
   Students who wish to make a more detailed study of Professor
Feynman's work will be interested to know that the books referred
to by the Provost in his introduction are published by California
Institute of Technology and are entitled The Feynman Lectures
in Physics.


                               10
          The Provost of Cornell University
                  DALE R. CORSON
        introduces the Messenger Lecturer for 1 964

Ladies and gentlemen, it is my privilege to introduce the
Messenger Lecturer, Professor Richard P. -Feynman of
California Institute of Technology.
   Professor Feynman is a distinguished theoretical physicist,
and has done much to bring order out of the confusion
which has marked much of the spectacular development in
physics during the postwar period. Among his honours and
awards I will mention only the Albert Einstein Award in
1 954. This is an award which is made every third year, and
which includes a gold medal and a substantial sum of
money.
   Professor Feynman did his undergraduate work at M. l .T.
and his graduate work at Princeton. He worked on the Man­
hattan Project at Princeton and later at Los Alamos. He was
appointed an Assistant Professor at Cornell in 1 944, al­
though he did not assume residence until the end of the
War. I thought it might be interesting to see what was said
about him when he was appointed at Cornell, so I searched
the Minutes of our Board of Trustees . . . and there is
absolutely no record of his appointment. There are, how­
ever, some twenty references to leaves of absence, salary
increases, and promotions. One reference interested me
especially. On July 31st 1 945 the Chairman of the Physics
Department wrote to the Dean of the Arts College stating
that 'Dr Feynman is an outstanding teacher and investi­
gator, the equal of whom develops infrequently'. The Chair­
man suggested that an annual salary of three thousand
dollars was a bit too low for a distinguished faculty member,
and recommended that Professor Feynman's salary be in­
creased nine hundred dollars. The Dean, in an act of

                             11
    Introduction by the Provost of Cornell University
unusual generosity, and with complete disregard for the
solvency of the University, crossed out the nine hundred
dollars and made it an even thousand. You can see that
we thought highly of Professor Feynman even then!
Feynman took up residence here at the end of 1945, and
spent five highly productive years on our Faculty. He left
Cornell in 1950 and went to Cal. Tech., where he has been
ever since.
   Before I let him talk, I want to tell you a little more about
him. Three or four years ago he started teaching a begin­
ning physics course at Cal. Tech., and the result has added
a new dimension to his fame - his lectures are now pub­
lished in two volumes and they represent a refreshing
approach to the subject.
   In the preface of the published lectures there is a picture
of Feynman performing happily on the bongo drums. My
Cal. Tech. friends tell me he sometimes drops in on the Los
Angeles night spots and takes over the work of the drummer;
but Professor Feynman tells me that is not so. Another of
his specialities is safe cracking. One legend says that he
once opened a locked safe in a secret establishment, re­
moved a secret document, and left a note saying 'Guess
who?' I could tell you about the time he learned Spanish
before he went to give a series of lectures in Brazil, but I
won't.
   This gives you enough background, I think, so let me
say that I am delighted to welcome Professor Feynman
back to Cornell. His general topic is 'The Character of
Physical Law', and his topic for tonight is 'The Law of
Gravitation, an Example of Physical Law'.




                              12
                               1
